In order to name organic compounds you must first memorize a few basic names.
These names are listed within the discussion of naming alkanes.
In general, the base part of the name reflects the number of carbons in what you have assigned to be the parent chain.
The suffix of the name reflects the type(s) of functional group(s) present on (or within) the parent chain.
Other groups which are attached to the parent chain are called substituents.

Alkanes - saturated hydrocarbons
The names of the straight chain saturated hydrocarbons for up to a 12 carbon chain are shown below. The names of the substituents formed by the removal of one hydrogen from the end of the chain is obtained by changing the suffix -ane to -yl.
$
Number of Carbons     Name
1	methane
2	ethane
3	propane
4	butane
5	pentane
6	hexane
7	heptane
8	octane
9	nonane
10	decane
11	undecane
12	dodecane
$
Here is a simple list of rules to follow. Some examples are given at the end of the list.

1.Identify the longest carbon chain. This chain is called the parent chain.

2.Identify all of the substituents (groups appending from the parent chain).

3.Number the carbons of the parent chain from the end that gives the substituents the lowest numbers. When compairing a series of numbers, the series that is the lowest is the one which contains the lowest number at the occasion of the first difference. If two or more side chains are in equivalent positions, assign the lowest number to the one which will come first in the name.

4.If the same substituent occurs more than once, the location of each point on which the substituent occurs is given. In addition, the number of times the substituent group occurs is indicated by a prefix (di, tri, tetra, etc.).

5.If there are two or more different substituents they are listed in alphabetical order using the base name (ignore the prefixes).
The only prefix which is used when putting the substituents in alphabetical order is iso as in isopropyl or isobutyl. The prefixes sec- and tert- are not used in determining alphabetical order except when compared with each other.
$
6.If chains of equal length are competing for selection as the parent chain, then the choice goes in series to:
a) the chain which has the greatest number of side chains.
b) the chain whose substituents have the lowest- numbers.
c) the chain having the greatest number of carbon atoms in the smaller side chain.
d)the chain having the least branched side chains.

7.A cyclic (ring) hydrocarbon is designated by the prefix cyclo- which appears directly in front of the base name.
$

Unsaturated Hydrocarbons

Double bonds in hydrocarbons are indicated by replacing the suffix -ane with -ene.
 If there is more than one double bond, the suffix is expanded to include a prefix that indicates the number of double bonds present (-adiene, -atriene, etc.). 
Triple bonds are named in a similar way using the suffix -yne.
 The position of the multiple bond(s) within the parent chain is(are) indicated by placing the number(s) of the first carbon of the multiple bond(s) directly in front of the base name.
$

Here is an important list of rules to follow:

The parent chain is numbered so that the multiple bonds have the lowest numbers (double and triple bonds have priority over alkyl and halo substituents).

When both double and triple bonds are present, numbers as low as possible are given to double and triple bonds even though this may at times give "-yne" a lower number than "-ene".
 When there is a choice in numbering, the double bonds are given the lowest numbers.

When both double and triple bonds are present, the -en suffix follows the parent chain directly and the -yne suffix follows the -en suffix (notice that the e is left off, -en instead of -ene). 
The location of the double bond(s) is(are) indicated before the parent name as before, and the location of the triple bond(s) is(are) indicated between the -en and -yne suffixes.
$

Cyclic Compounds

A cyclic (ring) hydrocarbon is designated by the prefix cyclo- which appears directly in front of the base name.
When substitutions are present on a cyclic compound, the number can start from the carbon where the group is present itself as in cyclic there is no start point or end point.
$

Alkyl halides

The halogen is treated as a substituent on an alkane chain. The halo- substituent is considered of equal rank with an alkyl substituent in the numbering of the parent chain. The halogens are represented as follows:

F	fluoro-
Cl	chloro-
Br	bromo-
I	iodo-
$
Alcohols 

Alcohols are named by replacing the suffix -ane with -anol. 
If there is more than one hydroxyl group (-OH), the suffix is expanded to include a prefix that indicates the 
number of hydroxyl groups present (-anediol, -anetriol, etc.). 
The position of the hydroxyl group(s) on the parent chain is(are) indicated by placing the number(s)
 corresponding to the location(s) on the parent chain directly in front of the base name (same as alkenes).
$
Aldehydes 

Aldehydes are named by replacing the suffix -ane with -anal.
 If there is more than one -CHO group, the suffix is expanded to include a prefix that indicates the 
number of -CHO groups present (-anedial - there should not be more than 2 of these groups on the 
parent chain as they must occur at the ends). 
It is not necessary to indicate the position of the -CHO group because this group will be at the end of 
the parent chain and its carbon is automatically assigned as C-1. 
$
Carboxylic Acids 

Carboxylic acids are named by counting the number of carbons in the longest continuous chain including the 
carboxyl group and by replacing the suffix -ane of the corresponding alkane with -anoic acid. 
If there are two -COOH groups, the suffix is expanded to include a prefix that indicates the number of -COOH groups 
present (-anedioic acid - there should not be more than 2 of these groups on the parent chain as they must occur at the ends). 
It is not necessary to indicate the position of the -COOH group because this group will be at the end of the parent chain and its
 carbon is automatically assigned as C-1.
$
Summary of functional groups

group	   Prefix	    Suffix
carboxylic    none         -oic acid
acids            
aldehydes   none	   -al
ketones       none	   -one
alchols         hydroxy-   -ol
amines        amino-	   -amine
ethers          alkoxy-	   -ether
fluorine        fluoro-	   none
chlorine       chloro-	   none
bromine       bromo-	   none
iodine           iodo-	   none
$
