
Alkyl halides

The halogen is treated as a substituent on an alkane chain. The halo- substituent is considered of equal rank with an alkyl substituent in the numbering of the parent chain. The halogens are represented as follows:

F	fluoro-
Cl	chloro-
Br	bromo-
I	iodo-
$
Alcohols 

Alcohols are named by replacing the suffix -ane with -anol. 
If there is more than one hydroxyl group (-OH), the suffix is expanded to include a prefix that indicates the 
number of hydroxyl groups present (-anediol, -anetriol, etc.). 
The position of the hydroxyl group(s) on the parent chain is(are) indicated by placing the number(s)
 corresponding to the location(s) on the parent chain directly in front of the base name (same as alkenes).
$
Aldehydes 

Aldehydes are named by replacing the suffix -ane with -anal.
 If there is more than one -CHO group, the suffix is expanded to include a prefix that indicates the 
number of -CHO groups present (-anedial - there should not be more than 2 of these groups on the 
parent chain as they must occur at the ends). 
It is not necessary to indicate the position of the -CHO group because this group will be at the end of 
the parent chain and its carbon is automatically assigned as C-1. 
$
Carboxylic Acids 

Carboxylic acids are named by counting the number of carbons in the longest continuous chain including the 
carboxyl group and by replacing the suffix -ane of the corresponding alkane with -anoic acid. 
If there are two -COOH groups, the suffix is expanded to include a prefix that indicates the number of -COOH groups 
present (-anedioic acid - there should not be more than 2 of these groups on the parent chain as they must occur at the ends). 
It is not necessary to indicate the position of the -COOH group because this group will be at the end of the parent chain and its
 carbon is automatically assigned as C-1.
$
Summary of functional groups

group	   Prefix	    Suffix
carboxylic    none         -oic acid
acids            
aldehydes   none	   -al
ketones       none	   -one
alchols         hydroxy-   -ol
amines        amino-	   -amine
ethers          alkoxy-	   -ether
fluorine        fluoro-	   none
chlorine       chloro-	   none
bromine       bromo-	   none
iodine           iodo-	   none
$